We have come to the end of a very
intense day of trying to wrap our heads
around some perhaps very different and
new concepts about programming
that make the act of programming
feel pretty different from how we
might be used to it when we're
thinking about functions, purity.
Side effects, things like that instead of
commands and imperative statements, so
let's take a moment to reflect on all of
the amazing stuff that we have done today.
We covered a bunch of stuff.
We covered pure functions,
what they are how to identify them.
What red flags to look for?
How to avoid side effects, and
what side effects even are so
how side effects are anything that
a function does that talks to the outside
world other than taking its input
arguments and returning its output value.
We also looked at some of the key
kind of techniques and tools and
also consequences of what it means
to work with pure functions,
and avoid side effects.
So we looked at things using recursion,
instead of iteration,
to run the same chunk
of code multiple times.
We looked at using higher order functions
which take functions as values or
return functions as outputs.
And we looked at how to, break functions
down break complex functions down
into simple ones how the concept of
closure allows us to kind of remember or
lock in certain values certain
arguments to a function.
And then how to build up tiny, small
single argument functions into complex
programs using function composition and
things like pipelining.
And then we also talked a lot
about mutating data and
how we should not do that.
And we just now saw some ways
some techniques and some tools,
some libraries that we
can use in JavaScript.
To make sure we avoid
mutating any of our data,
because that is certainly gonna
help us with the predictability,
the testability, the debug ability,
and just the general
understandability [LAUGH] Of the code and
the programs that we're writing.
When we do functional programming,
because that is our whole objective,
functional programming can help us
write really predictable, really safe,
really dependable and
testable programmes and
hopefully make our lives as developers
a little bit easier even if we're not
doing super strict hundred percent
functional programming, and
we're just working in a few ideas
from functional programming,
maybe I shouldn't mutate this array,
maybe I should return a new one.
So that is a hope that now that
we have a few key ideas and
tools in our toolbox to help us
think like functional programmers
to understand times when functional
programming is a really good fit for
problems, and to have some ideas of what
we might want to explore in more detail or
learn more about next so
that we can continue our journey.
So let's take a moment to think
about those questions together.
What are we taking away today?
What are some key ideas and
some exciting new things that we
wanna look into that we're walking
away from this workshop with?
Would anybody like to share?
>> This is as exciting because I've
been learning React lately and
trying to learn class based components
versus function based components.
I was realizing that the same thing you
mentioned before understanding this and
prototypes was kind of mind boggling.
So cleaner components that
are functional components is
somewhat similar to the idea
of functional programming I
believe in these concepts helped
me to think about building
one function to solve one portion
of my input, output problem.
So build that chain so
I can have pipelines that
create the result that I want.
>> Awesome, awesome.
So yeah, just to recap that,
especially coming from the world of React,
where we have kind of the class based
react components versus the hooks and
function based react components,
understanding those differences and
why might be advantageous to work with
those functional style, is something
that is maybe very closely related to
the contrast between object oriented and
imperative code and functional code and
also taking away that we're
thinking about our programs in terms
of those data transformations and
how we can really isolate them so that we
write functions that just do one thing.
One operation on one input,
getting one output, and
then put those together through pipelines
to create more complex programs.
Amazing, amazing points.
Anyone else have takeaways to share?
>> I think the pipelining where it
is very similar to a Unix pipeline,
that's where something really clicked for
me.
I might just be because I really come
from a server management background.
But that was the point
where that's how it works.
So that's the logic behind it.
>> Yeah, definitely.
So for folks that have spent a lot of time
at the command line or working with Unix
systems, and pipelining fields sort of
second nature when you're piping commands
from one end to the next that is
very similar in concept to how we're
thinking about functional programming
where each command does one thing.
It takes an input, it gives an output,
and we can put them together in these
pipelines in these composed programs as
it were to get more complex work done.
So yes, absolutely great to see
connections being drawn between other
areas of programming that might not
have anything to do with JavaScript.
Because functional programming
pops up again and again and
some of those key ideas can pop up even
in places where you might not expect it.
So keep an eye out for those similarities.
Really great point.
Thank you.
>> I assume that this is
functional programming is kind of
how you would build a strong and
secure API.
One that, one that can handle when they,
the input is going to be this,
you're going to get the same output for
every single endpoint
that the person hits.
It's going to give that exact output.
Is that is that true?
Do you think API when you create an API
you should be thinking in terms of
Functional programming.
>> Should you be thinking in terms
of functional programming and
deterministic kind of input and
output out functions?
When you're thinking
about designing API's?
I think that it is a great teacher as it
were that functional programming can teach
us a lot that is super useful for
implementing things like API's.
Again so API's often have a lot of
kind of side effecting operations that
we need to do.
Maybe we need to store things to databases
or maybe we need to, output things.
But again, we can push all of that into
a certain outside edge of our program and
think instead about okay, what
are the computations that I need to do?
What are the data structures the data
values that I have coming in and
what are the things that somebody
needs me to give them back out and
thinking about that in, in any kind of.
Program that we're trying to
write where people are asking us,
hey, I want this resource or hey, tell me
what's going on with that thing over here.
Give me this this particular I don't
know cat picture on the internet.
Those are really great cases where where
we can you can take a lot of value from
these functional programming concepts
of how can we think about this less in
terms of what steps do I need to take
to do this thing, imperative style, and
more in terms of what are my inputs.
What are my outputs?
And how can I break that
process down into smaller
operations that are easier to write and
easier to think about?
So absolutely.
And personally,
I think it's a really great mindset.
To get into, when we're thinking
about any kind of program, right?
Even if it is just to ask myself, should
I be thinking about this in terms of
the steps that I need to take, or
should I be thinking about this in terms
of the data transformations that need
to happen, the inputs and the outputs?
And even if the answer is, what in this
case, I actually think an imperative step,
do this do that oriented kind of
mindset is more helpful for me here.
Taking that moment to reflect and think,
will thinking functionally helped me
solve this problem and help make my
system diagram simpler, for example,
is a really great question
to be asking ourselves.
Excellent points, everybody.
Okay, well,
I don't know about you all, but
I think we've really stretched
our brain muscles today.
And so, it is always good to give
your brain a little bit of a rest.
But the most important thing is
that we have all come together.
Today.
We've thought really hard about a lot of
really tough problems.
And I just wanna thank you all so
much for being here.
Whether we are doing this all together
in this call or whether you are perhaps
watching the videos later and
thinking through this on your own time,
thank you so much for
taking the time, taking the energy.
It takes a lot of energy to
stretch your brain like this.
To try to wrap our heads around these,
these ideas and these concepts and
this new mindset.
So thank you so much for
coming along on this journey through some
functional JavaScript first steps with
me I also want to give a huge shout
out to all the folks at the Recurse
Center, a programming community in
New York who helped me first wrap my
head around so many of these concepts.
And want to give a huge thank you to
front end masters for having me and for
observable for making all of these
notebooks and my time here possible.
But most of all, thank you all for
struggling through these exercises and
through these tough concepts.
And please make sure this isn't the end
of your functional programming journey.
The Learning continues
indefinitely forever.
So there is another notebook in this
collection with some references and
further reading for you.
So at the end of this collection
you'll find a next steps notebook.
You'll find this next steps notebook.
Here with a lot of references and
further reading,
including some of the things
that I've mentioned today,
including some other front end masters
courses you might want to take and
some more in depth resources on
some of these more individual
specific topics that we've gone through.
Also some links to some other libraries
and languages that you might want to check
out for things like functional
programming, utilities and JavaScript.
So I hope that this gives you
some good starting points for
your functional JavaScript next steps.
Now that we have taken our first
steps into understanding what is
going on in this wild world of functional
programming and how can we start applying
some of those ideas to our own code
right in our JavaScript code bases.
So thank you all so much,
and we'll see you next time.